The tape recorder is now running, and we're talking with Professor Roger Chartier in Paris.
And I guess if we can just start generally.
Histoire du livre is a French development, and you are considered the premier proponent of this.
I wonder, first of all, why it took scholars so long to look at the history of books as a reliable index.
of how culture changes, especially as it deals with reading.
Yes, it's true and not, because I think there was a history of the book since the moment in which, perhaps in the manuscript era, but after the invention of the printing press by Gutenberg, very rapidly there were some narratives about
the invention itself, and you know it was competition between different people, Gutemberg, Koster, the Netherlands, and after there was, in the 17th, 18th century, a kind of history of the printing press.
I have just worked recently on a famous text by Denis Diderot, who is now, his text is now in fashion because he's dealing with copyright and literary property.
And in a recent issue of Daedalus last year, there was a reflection trying to connect the Deidreau's reflection in the 18th century on the literary property and what happened to copyright now in the world of electronic textuality.
And so there was an interest for the history, the development, the progress, the difficulty of the
of the book, particularly in its printed form.
But you are right, in terms of scholarship, the history of the book was during a long time a purely technical matter and used particularly for the edition of text.
or for establishing catalogs.
And it seems to me that after the Second World War, a book written by the great French historian Lucien Fay with the help of a very young scholar at the time
the coming of the book, the book was translated in many languages and particularly in English, was brought the first time in which something established at the Histoire du Livre was proposed, that is to say a linkage between an economic and social dimension of the history of the production and producer of printed books.
And on the other hand, a reflection about the contribution of this medium to the religious transformation, to the progress of science, to the transformation of mentalities, and so on.
And from this book, 1948, in the French edition,
There was a development in France, but not only in France, of a new genre of histoire du livre, perhaps insufficiently technical sometimes.
And some bibliographers in America, in England, in the New Zealand, Australian half sometimes could decide this lack of knowledge about it.
the book as a material artifact in this perspective developed by the French historians, more or less connected with the Annale school.
But in spite of this limit, it seems to me that this Historie de Lis was developed in order to widen
the spectrum of questions dealing with the production, the circulation, and diffusion, or the consumption of the book.
And it's the basis for what was developed more recently, and particularly
I mean, for connecting, it seems to me the more carefully, more cleverly perhaps, an analysis of the text and an analysis of the book, because you have this fundamental ambiguity.
A book for us is both a specific object which is different from other objects in the written culture.
A book is not a newspaper, it's not a journal, it's not a letter.
But at the same time, if you are talking about the book by Humberto Eco, it's not direct less, it's material reality which is in that, but the content that is the work identified as a book.
with its coherence, originality, specificity.
And so it seems to me now this ambivalent nature of the book as a specific artifact, a material object, and the book as
defined as a certain kind of discourse is perhaps at the core of a new stage, a new step in the history of the livre.
Why it was so long to take into account?
It seems to me because when history was dominated on the one hand by
an analysis of the text as such.
There was no interest paid for the materiality in which these texts were inscribed.
And if you are thinking about political history, diplomatic history, religious history, the texts were, in a certain sense, disincarnated.
They were dematerialized.
And people were interested by the ideas or by the content and without knowledge or interest for
the material form.
And on the other hand, in the domain of economic and social history as developed by the Annals in the 1930s and also by the New History in America, it's clear that the book was not a very important material artifact.
Yes, the materiality is the essential point.
Yes, exactly.
So in this sense, there was a kind of gap
between an interest for the text without interest for the book and very limited parts of the book in the production or commerce of goods, which were dominated by other production and other products.
And so I think it was just after the Second World War when there was this perception that the book was a commodity and the book was the vehicle for conception, ideas, representation, and both one linked with the other, then perhaps there was a starting point for the Histoire du livre.
Now, you've written – you point out that the French Revolution is perhaps the quintessential example of where the printed books or writings can have a powerful impact on the changing –
on the making of history.
Can you think of any other really important landmarks and historical events where we can say, where we can look at people's reading as being influential in the way events unfolded?
I think I've been up to say that, in first instance, that all the printed matter
is not books.
And when you mention the French Revolution or the 70s or 80s of the 18th century in France, or if we are thinking about the English Revolution, what is dominant is the circulation of labels, pamphlets, newsbooks, newspapers.
And so in order to be correct, perhaps to think that and to stress
the fact that particularly in the moment of crisis there was a kind of invasion by the printed matter in the entire society, but the printed matter which is not necessarily the book.
And during the French Revolution there was a decreasing of the production of books and an extraordinary multiplication of these other printed matters.
And I suppose we could have the same kind of diagnosis.
for the English Revolution.
And so this is very important because now it seems to me that the Histoire du Livre is widened in two directions, both because it tried to encompass all these very ephemeral printed methods.
And you agree with that, I believe.
I think so, I guess, profoundly.
It's a difficulty also because if you are looking to your theological in folio of the 16th century, you have a good chance to meet a lot of copies of this edition.
If you are searching some more popular materials or just some panthers or levels sometimes, all the editions have disappeared because they were without any value economically.
And also they were very fragile.
So there is a correction to make for the perspective about what is the printed production in a given time.
at the time.
It's paradoxical, but I think there is something right in this.
And now also there is another element which is to consider, and particularly also in the period of crisis you mentioned, the French Revolution, the English Revolution, perhaps the American Revolution, the role played by the
what some historian has called a scribal publication.
That is to say we have to, you know, refuse a perspective according to which you have a pre-Gottemberg era of manuscript culture and a post-Gottemberg era
of printed matter.
In fact, the manuscript as a medium for circulation of text, as a form for publication of text, resisted to the printed matter and played a role which was often undervalued.
by the historian.
But fortunately, recently, there was a lot of attention paid to the scribal culture at the time of the Gutenberg press.
Well, certainly we have to think of the book as something other than, in addition to the conventional codex, and I think that's what you're talking about.
The book is almost a generic term.
It's been used almost as a generic term to identify
any kind of printed object.
Written object.
In fact, you were talking about survival culture.
Exactly.
And of course, today now we have the electronic book, which is a whole other, which you've written about as well.
Are you familiar with an exhibition in the United States?
There was a catalog
It was back in the 1940s, but it was the Grolier Club, a list of 100 most influential books published in America prior to 1900.
And you'd be amazed at how many of these objects were precisely what you're talking about.
Pamphlets, for instance, or the Sears Roebuck catalog.
People were wondering, what in the world would a catalog in which you could order goods?
Why would that be influential?
But there are people who argue that you could never have developed the Midwest and the Western frontier without this catalog.
And that's a book, and that's a book that people read, or the telephone book.
I think maybe that's going maybe a bit too far, but they did choose these objects as 100 of the most influential.
You also have written, and I find it really fascinating, that I think you said in the 1500s and the 16th century that in Spain there was an attempt to suppress all works of fiction.
because they were considered dangerous.
How is it that fiction could be considered dangerous?
Oh, yeah.
I think I know the answer, but I'd love to hear you articulate it.
No, no, you're right.
I think the main elements, because this hostility to fiction was not only in Golden Age Spain, you can find also some traces of this in the 18th century.
But in the case you mentioned, it's because of...
The fact that fiction can substitute in the mind of the reader a fictional world.
and in a sense to create a kind of fictional world more interesting, more pleasant than the real one.
And in this case of Spain, there was a reference to Plato when in the Republic the poets,
are expelled from the Republic.
And it was in the 16th century a recession in two manner, both with the Christian dimension, that is to say only God is the creator, and the writer who tried to create worlds is also, in a sense, is trespassing
the only power of God.
And secondly, there was also a kind of vision according to which there was, like in Don Quixote, there is a kind of loss
of the sense of the world by this excess of fiction and this excess of reading.
The 18th century, we fashioned this in a very medical language, and in the 18th century you have a lot of denunciation of fiction which are using
The vocabulary of medicine, that is to say the fever for reading, like an illness, a kind of epidemy because it's collective, and personal and individual illness because the individual has completely lost.
this relation with the world and projecting himself or herself in a fictitious world.
So there was this distrust vis-à-vis fiction which was using both at the same time reference to the Neoplatonist philosophy
to the Christian morality and also to a kind of, in particular in the 18th century, a kind of medical discourse.
And so you have this.
There was a lot of fiction published, written and published from the 16th century to the 18th century, but we have not to forget that it was against
this discourse condemning this invention of imaginary world, which were considered as a danger for a reader living in another world, the real one.
And were they successful at all in trying to suppress it?
In this case, it was also connected with the colonization because the first text, legislative text, were forbidding the printing and introduction of this different fictional genre in the Indias.
that is to say, in the Spanish colonies in the New World.
There was an attempt in 1555 to impose this to Spain, but in fact they failed because, as you know, it was a time in which perhaps the Spanish literature invented the more modern form of fiction, not only Don Quixote, but also the picaresque novels.
And so there was this paradoxical situation.
Spain was both.
At the same time, the country in which you have the more determined legislative text against fiction, and at the same time perhaps the matrix of the modern literature.
Do you think this has been apparent throughout modern history, modern being over the last several hundred years, that fiction, wherein fiction does have the power,
to be dangerous or to influence historical events?
The problem is the fact that it seems to me that now the more powerful fictional are not necessarily the written and printed ones.
And here there was the same discussion in 16th century because in pain if there was this fear for fiction it's because at the time the reading silently
and in solitude was developed.
If you read collectively a large fictional text, immediately the difference between the world of the text and the world of the reader and the listeners is evident.
You are not in the world of the text.
You are in a real world in which someone is reading a large text to the others.
At the time, in the 16th century, you have the development among the elite of reading silently and in solitude, like the way through which Don Quixote is reading the Chivaric novels.
This projection of the text within the reader or the projection of the reader within the text are the basis for this fear against fiction and also the basis for this extraordinary invention and creation which is this Cervantes novel written by Cervantes.
I've now seen the moment in which fiction was mainly transferred on the screen, the screen of the movie, the screen of the TV, and perhaps now the screen of the computer.
You have another form of this blurring erasure between the world of the viewer, of the beholder, and the world of the fiction, and perhaps here.
There is some risk, danger, pleasure, I don't know, all the things at the same time.
And it was a case in the 18th century.
It was a case in the 16th century.
Fiction was pleasurable and fiction was considered as dangerous.
And with the screen of the 20th and 21st century, movies, theater, TV, and computer,
We have to have the same ambivalence between pleasure and Europe.
I have to tell you this book that you co-edited with Guillermo Cavallo, A History of Reading in the West, which I think is fabulous.
I think it's the best book out there, the best comprehensive look at this whole development.
And I have it right here, and to me it's an essential text.
In here you write that a text exists only because a reader gives it meaning.
And I'd love to explore that.
Is it possible?
I wonder, for instance, when you think of the Gnostic Gospels, which have lain buried in the desert for hundreds of years, do they only get meaning when they're discovered 2,000 years later?
Does a text only get meaning from the reader?
We can say it's connected with your point on the more influential books in America.
It's an exaggerated sentence because a book has a first meaning because someone has written this book.
And for the writer, even if there is no other reader than himself or herself, the book is acquired.
But if you are thinking about the meaning in a more collective, social dimension, and here connected with this concept perhaps debatable but useful or influential, clearly it's because readers are appropriating the text in very different ways and different periods and places that the text is always
recreated by these reading practices.
And in the sense of, effectively, if you are thinking of a text which is no reader except the man or the woman who has written it,
He has a meaning, but he's not influential in any manner, I can say, except for his writer.
If you are thinking about the meaning as appropriation of text, reception of text, refashioning of text, displacement of...
their importance in different contexts.
Clearly, here, this tension between what is proposed by the text and what is protected by the different reading communities is a key historical fact we have to deal with, it seems to me.
And it's the reason why I say this.
And it also, you can also interpret this in
Not in the collective and social dimension, but in the, I think it's a sentence more or less of a paraphrase of something written by Paul Ricoeur in a completely different dimension, which is a dimension of hermeneutics, that is to say that the text is inert.
And as a text, he has no life.
And the life is given by the fact that someone is appropriating it.
And so even if you are outside of the perspective of social and collective history, if you are in the perspective of phenomenology of reading or ameneutics, also this sentence,
As meaning, that is to say, the fact the dialogue, the dialectical relationship between the text and the reader, the reader and the text, is always giving meaning to the words on the page.
And one thing you point out is that the text itself is inscribed in one fashion or another.
If it's on stone or if it's on paper or on parchment or wherever it is,
an artifact.
It's a solid object that we can see.
Whereas the reader's interaction with the text, as you also point out, is ephemeral.
And it's very difficult to measure the reaction, I guess, unless the reader leaves something.
And so how do you as a scholar in this area measure the impact on the reader?
How does one go about trying to assess that, I wonder?
Yes, it's a great difficulty for the history of reading.
But as I said some time, that is not because the historical problem is difficult or sometimes without any evidence that it is not important.
And during a long time, historians have thought that the problems, the more important problems were the problems they were able to solve, because a lot of documents have been produced by the past.
It's not true sometimes.
The documents are not very interesting, and some problems without very important or impressive documentation are absolutely crucial.
It's a case, it seems to me, with this appropriation of text by readers.
There are different ways of different strategies.
Some are more collective, that is to say, to reconstruct the different convention, norms, learning of reading practices.
You cannot get with this the dimension of the individual.
But if you accept that the idea according to which every reader belongs to an interpretive community, a reading community, you can reconstruct something of the values, interests, norms, practices,
of this community, the monastic reader of the 12th century, the humanist reader of the 16th century, the female readership in the 18th century, and so on.
So it's the first layer, if I can say, for the history of reading.
If you want to be closer to the individual reader and closer to this act of appropriation, it's clear that you need to hear some traces
On the one hand, some reader has left memories, comments about the readings in different kinds of documents, like diaries, letters.
Machinari of text.
The other element, because here I am thinking or talking about what is external to the book read, which is a production of a new writing.
And you have also, as you said, and more and more developed and more and more important in the last decades analysis of the marginalia, the handwriting within the printed text.
And so it's an immense domain of analysis.
What I want to say is just something sometimes which is forgotten because
On the one hand, the more individualistic, the more personal documents are always framed within collective constraints.
And if you are looking at the marginalia in many books of the 16th century, you don't discover something which is very personal.
the marginalia organized according to techniques, which is to look at the sentences, the excerpts, the example in the book, which can be after copied in the commonplace books and reused if you have to produce a new discourse.
So even if it is very singular and individual, this singularity is encapsulated within
collective convention.
And conversely it seems to me that
you can find the fact that always a specific reader is not completely dominated and shaped by the convention of which defined the reading communities to which he belonged.
And so it's a political movement, if you want, on the one hand, how to look how
some readers have dispersed or displaced the constraints which were imposed on them, and conversely to try to look at what is normative, conventional, shared in any form of singular expression about
And so the great difficulty, of course, is the fact that what we have said about diaries, memoirs, correspondence, marginalia.
is very important and available for readers belonging to the different elites of the society.
If you are interested, as I am, in the more popular readers, it's very difficult to find any of these kinds of traces, particularly for the 16th or 17th century.
Even if you can see a development of the autobiographical genre,
among the workers and particularly in the cities since the 17th century on.
But, of course, there is a great discrepancy, and the more numerous readers are the more difficult, or the humblest readers are the more difficult.
to approach with this kind of sources.
Now, the American historian David McCullough, for instance, has told me that he believes there would not have been an American Revolution if there hadn't been Thomas Paine.
And, of course, the popularity of Common Sense was extraordinary.
There were perhaps 150,000 copies of that pamphlet.
And yet, how did people respond to it?
I think that's exactly what you're saying.
Just the fact that it circulated so tremendously suggests that it had an impact, even if there is not a lot of record left behind of how it directly influences the reader.
I think that's kind of something.
Yes.
Sometimes you can also have traces of this reading, not directly in the
writings, but because the text was conveyed to people, to rumors, to actions, to spectacles.
So there is also all this.
We know that quite immediately after the publication of the first part of Don Quixote, the two characters, Don Quixote and Sanso, were used as puppets or as elements within festivals included in Mexico or in Lima.
And in the first, the gate of the first edition.
He traveled over here.
Yes, because the book traveled to America.
And immediately, it was the first time, I think, in the history of literature that some characters were outside.
of the printed pages to be embodied in the form of puppets of carnivalesque masks in different festivals, and not only in Spain, but also in Mexico or in Peru.
And this is a great trend in the 18th century.
You know how Richardson novels
were commodified in format of engravings, wax, your display, your fans.
And so we have also to think about the books outside of the book or the text outside of the book, which is very impressive and influential in this sense.
Well, there's a play known to have been written by Shakespeare, which is what?
Cardinio.
Absolutely, indeed.
One of the characters of the chapter in the Sierra Morena.
Exactly.
And it's a very wonderful, because I have worked recently about both, and so it's a wonderful and unexpected and sometimes unknown encounter between the Rantas and the Sierra works.
Beyond the fact that they died the same year.
Exactly.
The same day, according to... Okay, more or less.
Maybe they're 10 days different.
Close enough, as we say.
You are interested in what you call the popular reader, the common reader, but I wonder if looking at it from another angle, if, for instance, you were to go to St.
Petersburg and look at the library there of Voltaire, for instance, would you know more about
Voltaire the writer by knowing the books that he read, by knowing how his reading shaped his life as a creative individual.
I just wonder if we could extend this to people like Gibbon.
Yeah.
and Sir Isaac Newton, all of these people who had extraordinary libraries.
And of course, we don't know much about Shakespeare, but we can assume from the references in his plays, the books that he undoubtedly had read.
Do you think that as a general concept, you could know more about the creative person by knowing their reading?
I think so, particularly in period in which
To compose an original work does not mean, and quite the contrary, that you were breaking with sources, references, materials.
And for people like Shakespeare or for people like Serrantes, it's clear that their genius, the singularity of their genius was profoundly rooted in this handling.
books from which motives, excerpts, quotations were extracted.
And so it's absolutely decisive.
And you mentioned Gibbon over there also.
It's very important because it's a way for resisting a temptation of a very disincarnated form of history of ideas.
As if everyone has read every text that in
point of time, and it's not true.
And so to reconstruct genealogically how ideas were molded, examples were used, the references were known, it's absolutely fundamental.
And in Voltaire we have this library and also the marginalia.
And it transforms, it seems to me, the vision of what is a production of ideas no more considered as something which has wood without wood, without material, without, nurtured by nothing except genius of the thinker.
And it's a way for relocating this production of ideas within the historical background is to look
at what they have read, how they have read, how they have used, and sometimes misunderstood.
And this is true both at the level you mentioned, great poets like Shakespeare or a philosopher like Walter, historian like Gibbon, but also at a more popular level.
You remember that one of the more famous books about reading is a book by Carlo Ginzburg, The Worms and the Sheaves.
And what is the main source?
The way to which Menocchio the Miller is reinterpreting, displacing, misunderstanding, appropriating text he has read.
Not so many as Voltaire, but the text he has read, the Fioretti della Bibbia, il Decamerone, perhaps on Alcoran.
The Travel by Montville, all these texts are the elements from which he's constructing his cosmogony, his cosmology.
And of course it's a wonderful example of the appropriation as reinterpretation, distortion, misunderstanding, and creation, invention.
This model could be applied for different periods and for different kinds of readers.
But it seems to me it's absolutely fundamental, not only for understanding the past, but also for transforming our ways of constructing the history of conception, ideas, theories, systems.
avoiding this kind of universal conversation as if Voltaire has read all the text of the previous to him.
No, he has read some specific text in different specific edition and he has made use of this reading for constructing the
his own works.
And then, of course, we can see how he made use of it, too.
Absolutely.
And in this case, we have the chance to have the possibility, like for Menocchio, to compare what is a text and the different author interpretation in the same time, and the uses made by Menocchio the miller or Walter the philosopher of the text they have read.
That was a wonderful statement.
Thank you very much.
That was just precisely the kind of insight that I was looking for.
Are you familiar with a report that was just issued here in the United States a few weeks ago, the National Endowment for the Arts report?
on the decline of readership, particularly in novels and poetry.
Not in detail, but I have learned something about this.
It seems to hit a lot of the points that you've hit, and I'm thinking particularly about your essay, The Death of the Reader, and you talk also about a new illiteracy.
And is this something that you are fearful is developing?
Is there a new... Yes.
My fear is against... It's created by the discrepancy between, on the one hand, a discourse, a discourse according to which the new technologies, a new form of inscription of communication of the text...
could be sort of universal.
There is no more frontiers, barriers, obstacles.
The circulation of the textuality thanks to the net is open to everyone because technically it is a possibility offered.
But at the same time, when you look at different statistics, you see that the reality of this is the increasing and not the reduction of inequalities.
Two or three years ago, perhaps it was like a chance now, but two or three years ago, 50 percent of the electronic addresses were located in English-speaking countries.
And so there is no statistic which is more clear for demonstrating the unevenness and inequalities in the access.
of this new technology.
So you have this tension between the discourse of universality, which is technically rooted, and the observation about the distribution, access, users of this new form of literacy.
And here is the risk of new illiteracy, not only at the scale of the planet,
between the part of the world and another part of the world, but also in each given society, with the possibility that people absolutely able to read and write could be left behind, if I can say, but outside of these systems of production, communication, and appropriation of text.
And here there is something which is not a fear, but which is a challenge.
and the different authorities, political economy or the public opinion, have to take into account this risk of the increasing of discrepancy within the world which is described every time as more uniform, more global, more universal.
I think this is very worrying.
There's one quote I saw of yours, which I thought was wonderful, and I think you've touched on it here, and maybe we can conclude with it, because I think we've covered a lot of—actually, there are two other questions I want to ask, but let's just do this one first.
You say that one thing you can't do with Historia Duluth is answer all the questions, but you certainly can raise the right questions.
And I just love that idea that, sure, we can't answer all the questions, but if we know which questions to consider, then we're going in the right direction, I think, at least, and we're striving towards an understanding of what we're trying to accomplish here.
Yes, it's the case with this reflection about the present, because often you have this idea that the electronic revolution has to be compared with the Gutenbergian revolution.
And so I think it's wrong, because as you said previously,
The use of the word book is for us very tricky because in general we say book identified as the printed text.
And I quote during our conversation the book by Favre and Martin, The Coming of the Book.
It's a very good book with a very bad title because Gutenberg didn't invent the book, of course.
And he didn't even invent it.
the book in the format in which the printed texts were circulated.
We have books from antiquity, and we have codecs from the second, the third, and the fourth century after Christ.
And the Chinese had printed books.
Exactly.
So everything is wrong with the coming of the book.
But I say this because if you are starting with this,
you can see that the comparison between the electronic revolution and the invention of the printing press is not the right one.
It would be more accurate to compare the invention of the electronic revolution with the invention of the codex.
That is to say an invention, a transformation, which transforms the form and the structure of the objects which were convened.
The textuality, Gothenburg, didn't change anything from this point of view.
A manuscript codex and a printed codex are the same morphological identity and nature, where, yes, if you have a role and if you have a codex or if you have a book, as we know,
And if you have a screen here, we have a very important transformation, particularly with consequences about the reading practices, the posture of the reader, the capacity or the possibility or impossibility for entering into the text, and so on.
So you see, here it could be a contribution of historical perspective.
It's not to solve the question, it's not to predict the future, but it's to perhaps sometimes
go beyond evident, immediate discourse.
And to see, I conclude on this point, it seems to me that if you do this you can underline the profound originality of the revolution of the electronic textuality for the first time.
We have no more this linkage between an object
And the text, a codex, a roll, a printed book, a manuscript book, are always objects which are different from others and which are conveying a text or a series of texts.
And so materiality of the text and textuality of the object are absolutely directly connected where it is.
With the electronic revolution, of course, the screen is the only object, with quotation marks, conveying all types of discourse, from the more private email to the more public website.
And here are launched, it seems to me, the main challenges we have to confront.
That is to say, the necessity to think about the textuality
disconnecting it from the different materialities which were constituting the written and manuscript and print culture in the past.
And so it couldn't be an example for what is useful to
in a reflection organized according an historical perspective.
In the book, The History of Reading in the West, you describe, and your colleague on page 30, you describe Montagna as a singular reader.
I wonder if you could tell me what you mean by that.
Yes, because it's coming back to our point about how to write an history of reading.
If you look, in this case we have, it's a privileged case, because on one side, on your hand, we know what is the humanist technique of reading.
I try to describe very rapidly as a commonplace technique.
You read.
You make the marginalia, you extract, you copy in a commonplace book, you reuse.
And we know that Shakespeare was using this technique.
Some scholars have shown how he was using a kind of this commonplace books in order to take immediately, example, quotations, sentences, and so on.
So you have this.
This is the dominant humanist model for reading.
Montaigne.
He's not doing this at all.
So perhaps the more humanist the writer is, the less humanist in the sense of the technique of the common places.
He has no common places.
He didn't write marginalia according to the rules, but he wrote at the end of his book a general comment and appreciation of what he has read.
He didn't read during the night.
All what he described
of himself as a reader is opposed to what was characteristic of a humanist, scholar, erudite reader.
And so here you can play.
between the individuality, which is all very creative, inventive, and the norms, the code, the convention.
And if you do this, you have another perception of Montaigne.
He is a humanist, of course, in a philosophical sense, but he is not.
in the more technical sense of the humanist techniques of reading, because he wants to read for his pleasure, for writing a book which is in many manner similar to the humanist literature, and so on.
So he's a wonderful example for us.
I think it's a good example for the tension between the individual and the collective.
Just one question, and it's really not related to much of what we've written, but when we talk about how a text awaits its reader, I think of the great Russian novels, which were written at a time when perhaps as many as 80% of the Russian population were illiterate, and yet they still...
wrote some of the most extraordinary works of fiction ever.
How does that figure, I wonder, into a concept of a history of reading?
If these books appeared in a place where the vast majority of people were unable to receive them?
Or is this relevant to what we're talking about?
I don't know.
No, I think it's...
It's interesting, because it's a very complex dynasty.
You have no expertise for the Russian case.
But if you think about Don Quixote, there is something comparable.
The level of illiteracy in Golden Age Spain was very high.
don't know how to read or to write.
So it's illiterate within the novel.
And nevertheless, immediately, as I said, the novel by Cervantes,
Transcended its geography.
I think maybe it's the same case with the Russian novels.
I think so.
You have forms of mediation.
And you have forms of circulation of the text beyond the text.
Not only because at the time, reading aloud.
was very familiar practices.
And reading aloud is a way for communicating a text to people who are illiterate or not able to read very friendly.
So it's a way for communicating the text.
And we know that in Golden Age Spain, and I suppose in Russian late 19th century, second half of the 19th century, this practice.
was very, very important.
And you have also the fact that for certain texts they enter into a kind of collective inheritance, and they were conveyed even if the people have not read or not read entirely the text.
You can see the same thing with the great famous text from the French literature here in the context in which the school was developing literacy.
People have not read entirely many of the Hugo novels, but they were known thanks to excerpts with the forms of reductions, abridgments, and so on.
So we have to think particularly about this novel, which becomes emblematic.
of a literature, a national literature, to think not only on the text as such, but all the forms which were conveying the text beyond the text, of course in altered forms, but nevertheless creating a familiarity with the text.
And an example, in the late 18th century or beginning of 19th century America, the novels by Richardson were known not according to the lengthy and perhaps for some time boring epistolary novels, but were circulated with very short narratives which abandoned the epistolary form, which rewrites
the story as a story and which make a kind of compact Pamela or compact Clarissa.
I didn't know that.
It's a good example of this.
But because there was a difficulty to find a market, Benjamin Franklin published it in Philadelphia.
a copy of Pamela, but it was a failure.
The book was too long, and it was not the longest of the Richardson novels.
And so immediately, for the more popular readership, there was this form of abridgment.
which were transforming both the genre from epistolary novel to storytelling, and also the dimension from very heavy in quarto to very short chart book.
Just briefly, I'll just conclude with a quick comment because it doesn't bear on something you just said.
Just a few months ago on June 16th, which is Bloomsday, right, all over the world, that incident in James Joyce's Ulysses, and they say this is the most celebrated literary event in the world.
And where perhaps 95 percent of the people who are celebrating have never read the novel.
Yes.
You know, in 18th century France, many people knew Rousseau and have never read a line by Rousseau.
And so it's another phenomenon we could try to understand.
And it's not only the text beyond.
the book, but also the author substituted to the text.
And so there was, it would be a very complex question, but it seems to me that at least from the 18th century on, you have what a French literary critic called the sacre de l'écrivain, the writer as sacred, both with the reference to the religious sacrality and also the reference to the
the king.
And so some figure in the late 18th century, Rousseau 19th century ago, and many authors of the 20th century had acquired this, a kind of visibility of popularity which was beyond
The text is not read or not entirely read or known very, very vaguely.
And so it would be a new figure of the authors which was endowed, in a sense,
by this sacrality of the politics or of the religion would be a form of, according to the point of view, of secularization of literature, of secularization of religiosity, or of a form of literarization of the sacred.
I think Joyce is probably a perfect example of that, because how many people have read that novel?
Yeah, no.
Everybody knows about it.
Listen, Professor, I've taken an hour of your time.
Thank you.
I just can't thank you enough.
I hope some material will be useful for you.
It will be.
And you can make me speaking real English.
Well, if you want...
To look at some of the quotes that I use, I'm happy.
Yes, you can send my mail, and I can do that.
You're coming back here, I guess, in the spring, is that right?
Absolutely, it's mid-January.
So that's fine.
And if you email me your address, I'll send you some copies of... Yes, I have you.
I can show to one of your... And I'd love for you to... Okay.
Thank you so much for your time, sir.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
Have a good time with your book.